viṣṇorvīryāṇi ko vā kathayatu dharaṇe: kaśca reṇūnmimīte
yasyaivāṅghritrayeṇa trijagadabhimitaṃ modate pūrṇasampat
yosau viśvāni dhatte priyamiha paramaṃ dhāma tasyābhiyāyāṃ
tvadbhaktā yatra mādyantyamṛtarasamarandasya yatra pravāha: ||1||
viṣṇo:-vīryāṇi	the glories of Vishnu
ka: vā kathayatu	who can recount
dharaṇe: ka:-ca reṇūn-mimīte	and of the earth, who, the sand particles, can count,
yasya-eva-aṅghri-trayeṇa	by the three strides of whose feet alone
tri-jagat-abhimitaṃ	the three worlds were measured
modate pūrṇa-sampat	and is joyous all wealth and prosperities
ya:-asau viśvāni dhatte	who this world supports
priyam-iha paramaṃ dhāma	this loving, to me, the supreme abode
tasya-abhiyāyāṃ	of His, may I attain
tvat-bhaktā:-yatra mādyanti-	Thy devotees where are blissful
amṛta-rasa-marandasya	and the immortality juice honey
yatra pravāha:	where flows
Who can recount the glories of the All Pervading Lord Vishnu or count the sand particles of the universe? The three strides of His feet alone measured the three worlds, and the worlds are full of joy with wealth and prosperity because of the touch of His feet. He alone is the support of the worlds. His supreme abode is dear to me and may I attain it, where Thy devotees enjoy bliss and the honey juice of immortality flows free.
ādyāyāśeṣakartre pratinimiṣanavīnāya bhartre vibhūte-
rbhaktātmā viṣṇave ya: pradiśati havirādīni yajñārcanādau |
kṛṣṇādyaṃ janma yo vā mahadiha mahato varṇayetso'yameva
prīta: pūrṇo yaśobhistvaritamabhisaret prāpyamante padaṃ te ||2||
ādyāya-aśeṣa-kartre	for the Eternal, (the one) who created everything
prati-nimiṣa-navīnāya	(one who is) every moment new
bhartre vibhūte:-	(one who is) Lord of all majesties
bhaktātmā viṣṇave ya:	a devotee, to Vishnu, who
pradiśati havi:-ādīni	offers sacrifices etc.,
yajña-arcana-ādau	through Yangya worship etc.,
kṛṣṇādyaṃ janma ya: vā	Krishna and other (incarnations) birth, or who
mahat-iha mahata:	great among the greatest here
varṇayet-sa:-ayam-eva	describes, he such alone
prīta: pūrṇa:	happy and full
yaśobhi:-tvaritam-	of renown, quickly
abhisaret prāpyam-	attains, the to be attained
ante padaṃ te	in the end, abode of Thine
A devotee who offers sacrifices through Yangya worship etc., to Vishnu, the one who existed before the creation, one who created everything, one who is every moment new, who is Lord of all majesties, or a devotee who describes the incarnations of Lord, like that of Krishna, which is the greatest, he alone will be happy and full of renown, and at the end of his life will quickly attain the abode which is to be attained in the end - Thy abode.
he stotāra: kavīndrāstamiha khalu yathā cetayadhve tathaiva
vyaktaṃ vedasya sāraṃ praṇuvata jananopāttalīlākathābhi: |
jānantaścāsya nāmānyakhilasukhakarāṇīti saṅkīrtayadhvaṃ
he viṣṇo kīrtanādyaistava khalu mahatastattvabodhaṃ bhajeyam ||3||
he stotāra: kavīndrā:-	O you poet laudators
tam-iha khalu	Him, here indeed
yathā cetayadhve tathā-eva	in which ever way you understand, in that way only
vyaktaṃ vedasya sāraṃ praṇuvata	the clear essence of the Vedas, praise
janana-upātta-līlā-kathābhi:	incarnation including sportive deeds narrations
jānanta:-ca-asya	and understanding His
nāmāni-akhila-	names, limitless
sukha-karāṇī-iti	happiness conferring, thus
saṅkīrtayadhvaṃ	chant whole heartedly
he viṣṇo	O Lord Vishnu!
kīrtana-ādyai:-tava	by chanting etc of Thy (names etc.,)
khalu mahata:-tattva-bodhaṃ	indeed, the Great, the knowledge of Truth
bhajeyam	will attain
O you poets, who sing the praise of the kings women etc., in whatever way you know, sing the praise of the Lord who is clear essence of all the Vedas, narrating His deeds in various incarnations. Understand that the chanting of His names confers limitless happiness, and so chant them whole heartedly. O Lord Vishnu! by chanting the names of Thee The Great, I will attain the knowledge of the Truth.
viṣṇo: karmāṇi sampaśyata manasi sadā yai: sa dharmānabadhnād
yānīndrasyaiṣa bhṛtya: priyasakha iva ca vyātanot kṣemakārī |
vīkṣante yogasiddhā: parapadamaniśaṃ yasya samyakprakāśaṃ
viprendrā jāgarūkā: kṛtabahunutayo yacca nirbhāsayante ||4||
viṣṇo: karmāṇi	Mahaa Vishnu's deeds
sampaśyata manasi	reflect on, in the mind
sadā yai: sa	always, by which He
dharmān-abadhnāt-	Dharma (righteousness) established
yāni-indrasya-eṣa	which (deeds) for Indra, He
bhṛtya: priyasakha iva ca	as a servant and as a friend
vyātanot kṣemakārī	carried out, welfare bringing,
vīkṣante yogasiddhā:	is experienced by Yogis and Siddhaas
parapadam-aniśaṃ	the transcendent Supreme state, always
yasya samyak-prakāśaṃ	whose, well illumined
viprendrā:-jāgarūkā:	great holy men, and scholars
kṛta-bahu-nutaya:	composing many hymns
yat-ca nirbhāsayante	whom try to expound
One should always meditate on the great deeds of Lord Mahaa Vishnu, by which He established righteousness, and by which He helped Indra sometimes as a servant, and some times as a friend, bringing welfare to him and to the whole world. The Lord's supreme state and well illumined Pure Consciousness is experienced by Yogis and Siddhas. Whose greatness great holy men and scholars try to expound by composing many hymns of praise.
no jāto jāyamāno'pi ca samadhigatastvanmahimno'vasānaṃ
deva śreyāṃsi vidvān pratimuhurapi te nāma śaṃsāmi viṣṇo |
taṃ tvāṃ saṃstaumi nānāvidhanutivacanairasya lokatrayasyā-
pyūrdhvaṃ vibhrājamāne viracitavasatiṃ tatra vaikuṇṭhaloke ||5||
no jāta:-jāyamāna:-api ca	not,those born and also those being born now
samadhigata:-tvat-mahimna:-	have understood Thy majesty (glory)
avasānaṃ	the limit (limitlessness)
deva śreyāṃsi vidvān	O Lord! Welfare promoting, knowing
prati-muhu:-api	every moment also
te nāma śaṃsāmi viṣṇo	Thy name I will chant O Vishnu!
taṃ tvāṃ saṃstaumi	That Thee, I will prise
nānāvidha-nuti-vacanai:-	by various different hymns invoking
asya loka-trayasya-	of these three world's
api-ūrdhvaṃ vibhrājamāne	also above shining
viracita-vasatiṃ	created and residing in
tatra vaikuṇṭhaloke	that Vaikunthloka
Those born and those being born now, have not understood Thy limitless majesty and glory. O Lord! Knowing that the chanting of Thy names is welfare promoting, I will every moment chant Thy names. O Vishnu! I will praise Thee by various different hymns invoking Thee who do reside in the Vaikunthaloka which shines transcending the three worlds.
āpa: sṛṣṭyādijanyā: prathamamayi vibho garbhadeśe dadhustvāṃ
yatra tvayyeva jīvā jalaśayana hare saṅgatā aikyamāpan |
tasyājasya prabho te vinihitamabhavat padmamekaṃ hi nābhau
dikpatraṃ yat kilāhu: kanakadharaṇibhṛt karṇikaṃ lokarūpam ||6||
āpa: sṛṣṭi-ādi-janyā:	water, in the creations beginning was created
prathamam-ayi vibho	at first, O Lord of the Universe!
garbha-deśe dadhu:-tvāṃ	inside themselves held Thee
yatra tvayi-eva jīvā:	where, in Thee alone, the jeevas
jalaśayana hare	O Lord Reclining in the Waters!
saṅgatā:-aikyam-āpan	came together and merger getting
tasya-ajasya prabho te	of that birthless Lord! Of Thee
vinihitam-abhavat	placed remained
padmam-ekaṃ hi nābhau	lotus one, indeed in (Thy) naval
dik-patraṃ yat kila-āhu:	the quarters were petals of which, indeed is said
kanakadharaṇibhṛt	the golden mountain
karṇikaṃ loka-rūpam	the pericarp constituting the worlds
O Lord of the Universe! At first, at the beginning of the creation water came into existence and held Thee into themselves. O Lord Reclining on the Waters! All the jeevas then were merged and held in Thy being. On Thee the Birthless Lord! There rose one lone lotus from Thy naval with eight petals representing the eight quarters and the golden mountain (Mahaameru) as its pericarp representing all the worlds.
he lokā viṣṇuretadbhuvanamajanayattanna jānītha yūyaṃ
yuṣmākaṃ hyantarasthaṃ kimapi tadaparaṃ vidyate viṣṇurūpam |
nīhāraprakhyamāyāparivṛtamanaso mohitā nāmarūpai:
prāṇaprītyekatṛptāścaratha makhaparā hanta necchā mukunde ||7||
he lokā	O men!
viṣṇu:-etat-bhuvanam-ajanayat-	Vishnu this world created
tat-na jānītha yūyaṃ	that do not know you all
yuṣmākaṃ hi-antarasthaṃ	of you all inside resides
kimapi tat-paraṃ	another indescribable
vidyate viṣṇurūpaṃ	there remains Vishnu's form
nīhāra-prakhya-māyā-	mist like Maayaa
parivṛta-manasa:	covered minds
mohitā: nāma-rūpai:	infatuated by names and shapes
prāṇa-prīti-eka-tṛptā:-	sense enjoyments alone satisfied with
caratha makhaparā	you are living inclined towards sacrifices
hanta na-icchā mukunde	alas! (you) do not covet Mukund
O men! You all do not know that Vishnu is the creator of this world. You also do not know that he resides in a subtle form within you. With your minds covered with the mist of Maayaa, you are infatuated by names and shapes, performing sacrifices with the aim of living a life deeming sense satisfaction the sole meaning of life. Alas! you do not covet Mukunda (Krishna).
mūrdhnāmakṣṇāṃ padānāṃ vahasi khalu sahasrāṇi sampūrya viśvaṃ
tatprotkramyāpi tiṣṭhan parimitavivare bhāsi cittāntare'pi |
bhūtaṃ bhavyaṃ ca sarvaṃ parapuruṣa bhavān kiñca dehendriyādi-
ṣvāviṣṭo'pyudgatatvādamṛtasukharasaṃ cānubhuṅkṣe tvameva ||8||
mūrdhnām-akṣṇāṃ	of heads, of eyes
padānāṃ vahasi khalu	of feet, undertake indeed
sahasrāṇi	thousands
sampūrya viśvaṃ	filling the universe
tat-protkramya-api	that transcending also
tiṣṭhan parimita-vivare	established in a limited cavity
bhāsi-citta-antare-api	(Thou) do shine inside the hearts also (of beings)
bhūtaṃ bhavyaṃ ca sarvaṃ	past future and everything
parapuruṣa bhavān	O Supreme Being Thou!
kiñca deha-indriya-ādiṣu-	what more, in body, senses etc.,
āviṣṭa:-api-	entering also
udgatatvāt-	being beyond all that
amṛta-sukha-rasaṃ	liberation bliss nectar
ca-anubhuṅkṣe tvam-eva	do enjoy Thou alone
O Supreme Being! Thou do have thousands of heads eyes and feet which fill the whole world, yet transcending it all, Thou do reside in the limited cavity of the inner most heart of beings. Thou are everything in the past future and now. Besides, what more, though Thou have entered the body senses etc., Thou alone transcend all this and enjoy the bliss of the liberation nectar.
yattu trailokyarūpaṃ dadhadapi ca tato nirgato'nantaśuddha-
jñānātmā vartase tvaṃ tava khalu mahimā so'pi tāvān kimanyat |
stokaste bhāga evākhilabhuvanatayā dṛśyate tryaṃśakalpaṃ
bhūyiṣṭhaṃ sāndramodātmakamupari tato bhāti tasmai namaste ||9||
yat-tu trailokya-rūpaṃ dadhat-	because of, the three world's form, taking on
api ca tata: nirgata:-	and also from that transcending
ananta-śuddha-jñāna-ātmā	Eternal Pure Knowledge Consciousness
vartase tvaṃ tava khalu	do remain Thou, Thy indeed
mahimā sa:-api	greatness that also
tāvān kim-anyat	is so great, what more
stoka:-te bhāga:	a small of Thy part
eva akhila-bhuvana-tayā	alone is whole world encompassing
dṛśyate tryaṃśa-kalpaṃ	is seen, three parts, about
bhūyiṣṭhaṃ sāndra-moda-ātmakam-	the major, intense bliss bearing
upari tata: bhāti	above all that shines
tasmai nama:-te	for That Thee salutation to Thee
O Infinite Being! Having taken on the form of the three worlds, Thou do transcend all that. Thou remain the Eternal Pure Knowledge Consciousness. What more, Thy greatness is so great that only a small part of it is seen as encompassing the whole world. The major three fourth part is intense bliss bearing, and shines above and beyond all. To That Thee salutations.
avyaktaṃ te svarūpaṃ duradhigamatamaṃ tattu śuddhaikasattvaṃ
vyaktaṃ cāpyetadeva sphuṭamamṛtarasāmbhodhikallolatulyam |
sarvotkṛṣṭāmabhīṣṭāṃ tadiha guṇarasenaiva cittaṃ harantīṃ
mūrtiṃ te saṃśraye'haṃ pavanapurapate pāhi māṃ kṛṣṇa rogāt ||10||
avyaktaṃ te svarūpaṃ	non-manifested Thy nature (the Nirguna form)
duradhigamatamaṃ	is very difficult to grasp
tat-tu śuddha-eka-sattvaṃ	that also pure and Sattvic
vyaktaṃ ca-api-	graspable and also
etat-eva sphuṭam-	this alone is clear (manifested form)
amṛta-rasa-ambhodhi-	liberation nectar's ocean
kallola-tulyam	waves like
sarvotkṛṣṭām-abhīṣṭāṃ tat-iha	the most superior, most dear/lovable that here
guṇa-rasena-eva cittaṃ harantīṃ	by its qualities and attribute, attract the mind
mūrtiṃ te saṃśraye-ahaṃ	Thy idol (form) resort to I
pavanapurapate pāhi māṃ	O Lord of Guruvaayur! Save me
kṛṣṇa rogāt	O Krishna! From disease
Thy unmanifested formless Being (Nirguna) is very difficult to grasp, whereas Thy form of pure Satva (Saguna) can easily be grasped. This form is clear and is like a wave on the ocean of liberation nectar. It is the most superior dear and lovable, with its attributes and qualities attracting the mind. To That Thy idol form I resort to. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Shri Krishna! save me from all diseases.